emma woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home andhappy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings ofexistence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with verylittle to distress or vex her.she was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate,indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sisters marriage,been mistress of his house from a very early period. her mother haddied too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembranceof her caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent womanas governess, who had fallen little short of a mother in affection.sixteen years had miss taylor been in mr. woodhouses family, less as agoverness than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularlyof emma. between them it was more the intimacy of sisters. evenbefore miss taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess,the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose anyrestraint; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away, theyhad been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached,and emma doing just what she liked; highly esteeming miss taylorsjudgment, but directed chiefly by her own.the real evils, indeed, of emmas situation were the power of havingrather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little toowell of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy toher many enjoyments. the danger, however, was at present sounperceived, that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes withher.sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of anydisagreeable consciousness.—miss taylor married. it was miss taylorsloss which first brought grief. it was on the wedding-day of thisbeloved friend that emma first sat in mournful thought of anycontinuance. the wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her fatherand herself were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third tocheer a long evening. her father composed himself to sleep afterdinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit and think of what shehad lost.the event had every promise of happiness for her friend. mr. weston wasa man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, andpleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering withwhat self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished andpromoted the match; but it was a black mornings work for her. the wantof miss taylor would be felt every hour of every day. she recalled herpast kindness—the kindness, the affection of sixteen years—how she hadtaught and how she had played with her from five years old—how she haddevoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health—and how nursedher through the various illnesses of childhood. he usualy need help. a large debt ofgratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last seven years,the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followedisabellas marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet adearer, tenderer recollection. she had been a friend and companion suchas few possessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowingall the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns, andpeculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, every scheme ofhers—one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who hadsuch an affection for her as could never find fault.how was she to bear the change?—it was true that her friend was goingonly half a mile from them; but emma was aware that great must be thedifference between a mrs. weston, only half a mile from them, and amiss taylor in the house; and with all her advantages, natural anddomestic, she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectualsolitude. his spirit needed help. she dearly loved her father, but he was no companion for her.he could not meet her in conversation, rational or playful.the evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and mr. woodhouse hadnot married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits;for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mindor body, he was a much older man in ways than in years; and thougheverywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiabletemper, his talents could not have recommended him at any time.her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, beingsettled in london, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her dailyreach; and many a long october and november evening must be struggledthrough at hartfield, before christmas brought the next visit fromisabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house,and give her pleasant society again.highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,to which hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, andname, did really belong, afforded her no equals. the woodhouses werefirst in consequence there. all looked up to them. she had manyacquaintance in the place, for her father was universally civil, butnot one among them who could be accepted in lieu of miss taylor foreven half a day. it was a melancholy change; and emma could not butsigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke,and made it necessary to be cheerful. his spirits required support. hewas a nervous man, easily depressed; fond of every body that he wasused to, and hating to part with them; hating change of every kind.matrimony, as the origin of change, was always disagreeable; and he wasby no means yet reconciled to his own daughters marrying, nor couldever speak of her but with compassion, though it had been entirely amatch of affection, when he was now obliged to part with miss taylortoo; and from his habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never ableto suppose that other people could feel differently from himself, hewas very much disposed to think miss taylor had done as sad a thing forherself as for them, and would have been a great deal happier if shehad spent all the rest of her life at hartfield. emma smiled andchatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; butwhen tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he hadsaid at dinner,poor miss taylor!—i wish she were here again. what a pity it is thatmr. weston ever thought of her!i cannot agree with you, papa; you know i cannot. mr. weston is such agood-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves agood wife;—and you would not have had miss taylor live with us forever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of herown?a house of her own!—but where is the advantage of a house of her own?this is three times as large.—and you have never any odd humours, mydear.how often we shall be going to see them, and they coming to see us!—weshall be always meeting! we must begin; we must go and pay weddingvisit very soon.my dear, how am i to get so far? randalls is such a distance. i couldnot walk half so far.no, papa, nobody thought of your walking. we must go in the carriage,to be sure.the carriage! but james will not like to put the horses to for such alittle way;—and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying ourvisit?they are to be put into mr. westons stable, papa. you know we havesettled all that already. we talked it all over with mr. weston lastnight. and as for james, you may be very sure he will always like goingto randalls, because of his daughters being housemaid there. i onlydoubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else. that was your doing,papa. you got hannah that good place. nobody thought of hannah till youmentioned her—james is so obliged to you!i am very glad i did think of her. it was very lucky, for i would nothave had poor james think himself slighted upon any account; and i amsure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spokengirl; i have a great opinion of her. whenever i see her, she alwayscurtseys and asks me how i do, in a very pretty manner; and when youhave had her here to do needlework, i observe she always turns the lockof the door the right way and never bangs it. i am sure she will be anexcellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor miss taylorto have somebody about her that she is used to see. whenever james goesover to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us. he willbe able to tell her how we all are.emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas, andhoped, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably throughthe evening, and be attacked by no regrets but her own. thebackgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwardswalked in and made it unnecessary.mr. knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was notonly a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularlyconnected with it, as the elder brother of isabellas husband. he livedabout a mile from highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome,and at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly from theirmutual connexions in london. he had returned to a late dinner, aftersome days absence, and now walked up to hartfield to say that all werewell in brunswick square. it was a happy circumstance, and animated mr.woodhouse for some time. mr. knightley had a cheerful manner, whichalways did him good; and his many inquiries after poor isabella andher children were answered most satisfactorily. when this was over, mr.woodhouse gratefully observed, it is very kind of you, mr. knightley,to come out at this late hour to call upon us. i am afraid you musthave had a shocking walk.not at all, sir. it is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that imust draw back from your great fire.but you must have found it very damp and dirty. i wish you may notcatch cold.dirty, sir! look at my shoes. not a speck on them.well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rainhere. it rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were atbreakfast. i wanted them to put off the wedding.by the bye—i have not wished you joy. being pretty well aware of whatsort of joy you must both be feeling, i have been in no hurry with mycongratulations; but i hope it all went off tolerably well. how did youall behave? who cried most?ah! poor miss taylor! tis a sad business.poor mr. and miss woodhouse, if you please; but i cannot possibly saypoor miss taylor. i have a great regard for you and emma; but when itcomes to the question of dependence or independence!—at any rate, itmust be better to have only one to please than two.especially when one of those two is such a fanciful, troublesomecreature! said emma playfully. that is what you have in your head, iknow—and what you would certainly say if my father were not by.i believe it is very true, my dear, indeed, said mr. woodhouse, witha sigh. i am afraid i am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome.my dearest papa! you do not think i could mean you, or suppose mr.knightley to mean you. what a horrible idea! oh no! i meant onlymyself. mr. knightley loves to find fault with me, you know—in ajoke—it is all a joke. we always say what we like to one another.mr. knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faultsin emma woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: andthough this was not particularly agreeable to emma herself, she knew itwould be so much less so to her father, that she would not have himreally suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect byevery body.emma knows i never flatter her, said mr. knightley, but i meant noreflection on any body. miss taylor has been used to have two personsto please; she will now have but one. the chances are that she must bea gainer.well, said emma, willing to let it pass—you want to hear about thewedding; and i shall be happy to tell you, for we all behavedcharmingly. every body was punctual, every body in their best looks:not a tear, and hardly a long face to be seen. oh no; we all felt thatwe were going to be only half a mile apart, and were sure of meetingevery day.dear emma bears every thing so well, said her father. but, mr.knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor miss taylor, and i amsure she will miss her more than she thinks for.emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. it isimpossible that emma should not miss such a companion, said mr.knightley. we should not like her so well as we do, sir, if we couldsuppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to miss taylorsadvantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be, at miss taylorstime of life, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important toher to be secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allowherself to feel so much pain as pleasure. every friend of miss taylormust be glad to have her so happily married.and you have forgotten one matter of joy to me, said emma, and avery considerable one—that i made the match myself. i made the match,you know, four years ago; and to have it take place, and be proved inthe right, when so many people said mr. weston would never marry again,may comfort me for any thing.mr. knightley shook his head at her. her father fondly replied, ah! mydear, i wish you would not make matches and foretell things, forwhatever you say always comes to pass. pray do not make any morematches.i promise you to make none for myself, papa; but i must, indeed, forother people. it is the greatest amusement in the world! and after suchsuccess, you know!—every body said that mr. weston would never marryagain. oh dear, no! mr. weston, who had been a widower so long, and whoseemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupiedeither in his business in town or among his friends here, alwaysacceptable wherever he went, always cheerful—mr. weston need not spenda single evening in the year alone if he did not like it. oh no! mr.weston certainly would never marry again. some people even talked of apromise to his wife on her deathbed, and others of the son and theuncle not letting him. all manner of solemn nonsense was talked on thesubject, but i believed none of it.ever since the day—about four years ago—that miss taylor and i metwith him in broadway lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he dartedaway with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us fromfarmer mitchells, i made up my mind on the subject. i planned thematch from that hour; and when such success has blessed me in thisinstance, dear papa, you cannot think that i shall leave offmatch-making.i do not understand what you mean by success, said mr. knightley.success supposes endeavour. your time has been properly and delicatelyspent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bringabout this marriage. a worthy employment for a young ladys mind! butif, which i rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it,means only your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, ithink it would be a very good thing for miss taylor if mr. weston wereto marry her, and saying it again to yourself every now and thenafterwards, why do you talk of success? where is your merit? what areyou proud of? you made a lucky guess; and that is all that can besaid.and have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?—ipity you.—i thought you cleverer—for, depend upon it a lucky guess isnever merely luck. there is always some talent in it. and as to my poorword success, which you quarrel with, i do not know that i am soentirely without any claim to it. you have drawn two pretty pictures;but i think there may be a third—a something between the do-nothing andthe do-all. if i had not promoted mr. westons visits here, and givenmany little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters, it mightnot have come to any thing after all. i think you must know hartfieldenough to comprehend that.a straightforward, open-hearted man like weston, and a rational,unaffected woman like miss taylor, may be safely left to manage theirown concerns. you are more likely to have done harm to yourself, thangood to them, by interference.emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others, rejoinedmr. woodhouse, understanding but in part. but, my dear, pray do notmake any more matches; they are silly things, and break up ones familycircle grievously.only one more, papa; only for mr. elton. poor mr. elton! you like mr.elton, papa,—i must look about for a wife for him. there is nobody inhighbury who deserves him—and he has been here a whole year, and hasfitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to havehim single any longer—and i thought when he was joining their handsto-day, he looked so very much as if he would like to have the samekind office done for him! i think very well of mr. elton, and this isthe only way i have of doing him a service.mr. elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very goodyoung man, and i have a great regard for him. but if you want to shewhim any attention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day.that will be a much better thing. i dare say mr. knightley will be sokind as to meet him.with a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time, said mr. knightley,laughing, and i agree with you entirely, that it will be a much betterthing. invite him to dinner, emma, and help him to the best of the fishand the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife. depend upon it, aman of six or seven-and-twenty can take care of himself.